Speaking of formative life experiences
and growing up in hidden economic
forces, one of the things I learned from
this book is that when I was
performing as a California raisin at the
age of six, I was actually participating
in a government like psyop, basically.
Explain that. Wait, no, you explain
that. What? You were a baby raisin? I
don't remember a lot from my childhood,
but I do remember putting on like a
purple swimsuit with big white gloves
and singing I heard it through the
grapevine as part of some school
production.
>> That's fantastic. I don't think I would
be invited to do that, but I do feel
like I would remember if I did. Yeah,
that does feel formative. I love that.
>> Okay, so California raisins, though,
they were part of a I guess
government-induced ad campaign for
raisins. I had no idea.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, you and I
have talked about doing a book at
various times.
>> Yeah, talked about it. That's pretty
much it. We talk about it and then we
get a few emails from like agents and
pub- publishing houses.
>> And then we get distracted.
>> we get distracted. But you know, um the
one thing I was thinking about is maybe
that idea for a recipe book
that maybe one that we should consider
at some point.
>> / supply chain.
>> Yeah, yeah, about the food in each one
and the business of it. You maybe I
would totally do that. I have some good
recipes, too. All right. All right, so
we are actually going to get our acts
together and do this.
>> Maybe. Okay, well, our guests today are
people who have actually gotten their
act together to publish a book while
running a highly successful podcast. It
is, of course, So we're going to learn
we're going to learn what to do. We're
going to That's right.
>> to take notes during the session.
>> That's right. Actually, someone who's
written two books now, so I don't really
know how she does it. Um but the through
line in all of this is I'm just going to
say it. We're going to be talking to the
one of the Planet Money co-hosts and
then a long-time contributor to Planet
Money and they've written this new book
called Planet Money a guide to the
economic forces that shape your life.
And was one of the through lines that I
think we share between All Thoughts and
Planet Money is this idea that like
there are all these hidden economic
forces that basically dictate the way we
live. Totally. I mean it's been
especially the you know the less I mean
it's always the case, right? But
especially in the last several years
which is just the sort of the invisible
becoming divisible.
>> Yeah. I guess they're not are they Yeah,
you know, we see how they shape their
life but there are all these things that
we like take for granted etc. And now
like they're in our face and we're
always scratching the surface of what we
know about them.
>> Right. We all became supply chain
experts during COVID. We became um trade
experts during 2025.
>> And now we're all going to become
commodity experts um given the Iran
situation as well. Well, without further
ado
we do have the perfect guest.
>> The people who actually wrote the book.
Uh we're going to be speaking with Alex
Mayyasi and Mary Childs. So thank you so
much for coming on All Thoughts. Thank
you for having us.
>> to be here. It's an honor to finally be
the perfect guest. Oh you've been the
perfect guest before.
>> I know but now I'm this is like the sun
is shining on me. Do you know what I
mean? I'm a perfect guest.
All right. So why a book and how did you
manage to do it between your actual day
job of podcasting?
>> Well this one's easy for me because I
did almost no work. Alex did all of the
book work and so that's what I would
recommend is in terms of division of
labor is to not do the work.
>> Okay. That's my tip.
>> still has a place.
>> I think that's right. This is good
advice I think.
Yeah, so um just have a friend who's a
long-time contributor. But basically I
think a lot of our work like feeds
itself and it's such a different medium
and like writing and processing like the
way that you synthesized some of the
episodes is like kind of crazy cuz it's
like a story in a totally different way.
But yeah, we just we it's a very
collaborative team effort, is what I
would say.
Why don't you talk about your your
process, Alex? And again, as the one who
apparently actually did all the work. Um
I don't Tracy and I are going to have to
play the rock, paper, scissors if we
ever do this, and which one actually has
to do all the work.
>> the book, or does the loser write the
book?
>> I don't want to write it. I'm like I'm
busy. I'm busy enough.
>> Cuz I feel like I won, but you know.
Well, okay. I'm too scarred from my
experience.
>> But like all right, like intuitively
doing the reporting for the podcast,
etc., you encounter a lot of things, and
assembling some of these big ideas into
a book
makes sense. But then again, the actual
like process. So, how do you like go
from thinking about okay, here are all
these things you talk about and learn
about, etc., to like putting it on
paper, kind of? Yeah, I think probably
the first big decision was really coming
up with a kind of organizing principle
for the book.
Um and so one of the early ideas we had
was to think of this book as a field
guide. You know, you can imagine like
leaving your house in the morning and
tucking it under your arm to help help
you as you experience the economic
forces outside your door.
Um
and, you know, then from there there
were some some different ideas we had
about how to structure the book. There
was some thought to maybe start with
kind of like your younger years, and
then increasing sections are as you get
older, you know, kind of then
retirement. Then we were like, we do end
in death, which sounds a little morbid,
but then again, I loved the idea of an
epilogue about the economics of
graveyards, which is a fascinating
topic. But ultimately, uh we structured
the book as kind of about different
parts of your life, such as some
expected ones, work and career, uh
saving investing, and some that are
maybe a little bit less expected, like
uh leisure, as well as um you know, love
and family. Um and so I think from
there, with this idea of kind of a field
guide to the biggest economic forces
that that shape your life, that impact
you, that kind of gave us and gave me in
particular some ability to kind of look
at both
you know, some really classic Planet
Money episodes that we thought we'd
really love to get that story in the
book as well as new ideas I had, other
members of the team had,
and be able to kind of have some sort
of, you know, filter or criterion to say
like, "Okay, what belongs in this book?"
Um and what doesn't.
>> Okay, so speaking of formative life
experiences and growing up and hidden
economic forces, one of the things I
learned from this book is that when I
was a performing as a California raisin
at the age of six, I was actually
participating
in a government like psyop, basically.
Explain that. Wait, no, you explain
that. What? You were a baby raisin? I
don't remember a lot from my childhood,
but I do remember putting on like a
purple swimsuit with big white gloves
and singing I Heard It Through the
Grapevine as part of some school
production. That's fantastic. I don't
think I would be invited to do that, but
I do feel like I would remember if I
did. Yeah, that does feel formative. I
love that.
>> Okay, so California raisins, so they
were part of a I guess
government-induced ad campaign for
raisins.
>> Yeah, yeah. I had no idea. Yeah, and
this is, you know, agriculture, right,
is an unusual sector. And one thing is
that that is unusual about it is that
there are cases where there are
government-sanctioned cartels, like
blessed by the power of the federal
government, and in fact enforced by the
federal government. You know, if the
government is often trying to prevent
different businesses within a sector
from, you know, collaborating to try and
fix and increase prices, instead in some
agricultural sectors like raisins,
the US government has historically, you
know, made an agreement with the raisin
growers and said, "Okay, you are able to
form, you know, a cartel." Or they often
might use words like cooperative.
>> Yeah. Um so you can collaborate as an
industry.
>> I never really thought about how how
different that word lands, you know,
it's like, "Oh, I'm part of like a dairy
cooperative. It's like oh, that's great.
But
>> Yeah, but that's just the word for group
in Spanish. Like I feel like that's
unfair to the word group.
>> economists certainly like use the word
cartel like non-prejoratively. That's
just like what's happening here. But
you're right, like when you think of
like a dairy cooperative or these dairy
cooperatives, like they are
They're all friends here. They're all
large They are businesses all working
together, often to restrict supply and
increase the price. And that's what was
going on with the raisin cartel in
California, centered in Carmen where
lots of raisins are grown.
And I think the economic logic for it is
like
you know, there are things about
agriculture that are hard. Sometimes you
have all these small farmers that are
going to sell to a few processors or,
you know, dairy markets. So you want
them to kind of have leverage almost
like a union. There's also a way if you
have a bumper crop one year, then you
get a low price, but then the next year
if you have like a really terrible crop,
I mean, maybe the price is higher, but
like you don't have that much to sell.
So that you know, there's this way that
the government sees value in allowing
them to cooperate to kind of smooth out
the supply. And that's what was
happening with raisins. It also meant
that when they had this organization
that was responsible for managing the
supply of raisins year to year in an
effort to kind of smooth things out, but
also boost the price, um they also
advertised. And so yeah, like their big
coup was like the like these singing
raisins. And apparently you were like
>> Tracy Allaway was the one that sang it.
Why didn't I know this two years ago? So
this is like really interesting. You
know, also again, like milk is another
one of these things that is like
collectively advertised for years is
like the drink milk campaigns with like
the mustaches that all the celebrities
wear. But it's interesting just musing
on this a little bit further cuz we've
done a fair number of episodes about
like
agribusiness. The giant gigantic, like
really powerful, you know, nationwide
entities. And whether it's chicken or uh
restaurant supply, etc. Of course, like
a really large company, they solve the
coordination problem by being one
company, right? And there is no like,
you know, they can pass pricing, you
know, the there's no law as far as I
know that says like the West Coast
manager can't coordinate on prices with
the East Coast manager, etc. But then
you have like these independent entities
like a farm, etc. And if they can't, you
know, intuitively, if they can't
coordinate on some level, whether it's
output and price, then how would they
how would we ever expect smaller
companies to compete against gigantic
companies that, you know, have that
ability to do internal coordination? I
just love that it's like, how did we
pick raisins? Why is it Are raisins so
important? Am I supposed to be eating
way more raisins?
I mean, some people would have strong
opinions on that. I mean, I think
raisins were a big deal like uh these
raisin farms had really like kind of
boon years like during World War II. You
know, they were growing lots of raisins
that were
bought by the federal government to send
to the troops.
Um and yeah, I think like probably I'm
I'm going to, you know, this is not I've
not done deep dive on this, but I would
also just assume, right? Like
the same way that like children used to
receive an orange for Christmas and be
happy about it, I assume also that like
the sweetness of raisins was much more
impressive when we were not just
sugar on a daily basis. Interesting. Now
you're the neighborhood villain if you
like give out raisins for Halloween or
something.
>> to be clear, is it still the same market
structure for raisins? It has changed
for raisins. And you know, the story in
the book, and this one comes from like a
classic amazing Planet Money episode,
is about uh two farmers, I mean, they're
a couple. Uh
ran their farm together. And you know,
there was a year in the early 2000s
where, you know, the the leadership of
the cartel said, "Okay, this year we're
diverting Everyone's diverting 47% of
their crop. So, not selling it, and
instead it goes to the cartel, which in
theory, you know, we'll we'll we'll save
it, sell it later, and then pass money
back." But in practice, these this
couple, these farmers felt like
this decision just kind of comes on high
down to us. We're not involved, and like
they spend a lot of that money on, you
know, sometimes marketing coups like
that California raisins, but other
things administrative costs that they
didn't necessarily see a huge benefit
from in their opinion.
And so they decided they they felt that
they'd found
almost a a legal loophole where if they
did certain aspects of like packing
raisins themselves, they felt that they
therefore were not covered by the
legislation and had to be part of the
cartel and could sell their entire crop
themselves.
Um this led led to like a stakeout and
like someone like a PI named Rocky like
getting video footage of raisins leaving
their farms that could then be used in a
court case. And this ultimately went all
the way to the Supreme Court.
Imagine staking out raisins.
>> It was it was in the in the in which way
did the the Supreme Court basically
ended the raisin cartel?
>> some earlier decisions found against
these farmers, the Horns, and they would
have had to pay a lot of money and the
cartel would have endured, but the
Supreme Court sided with them, said
that, you know, this is more or less
kind of like a taking of property
situation um and that this should not be
enforced by federal law. And so the
cartel still exists, but more as a kind
of organization that maybe does, you
know, coordination, maybe
advertisements, but that farmers like
the Horns are not compelled to divert
their raisins to anymore. So it really
uh changed the system.
>> Defanged the cartel. You briefly
mentioned oranges, and this is the other
thing I learned Well, I learned many
things from this book, but one thing
that stood out to me it was this idea
that you have
Cuties, the oranges, like the orange
brand, and you think that that's one
particular variety of oranges, but
actually it turns out that sometimes
it's different fruit. What's going on
there? Yeah, I mean I think this was
something
really fun to do with the book that like
we had this amazing episode about, you
know, these raisin farmers, the raisin
cartel. You can learn about, you know,
cartels in agriculture.
But for the book, there's also this
opportunity to show like, oh, this
really represents kind of like the
commodity trap.
Right? Like companies are always in
competition
and in a state of like perfect
competition, basically their profits go
down to zero cuz they're all busy trying
to lower their price, make a better
product, which is great for all of us as
consumers.
But not great if you want to make a
profit. And so like, how do you get out
of that? A cartel is one way that you
may be able to boost your price by
having like um
managing the supply and having pricing
power.
Um it was really interesting like the
the farmers in the episode and that I
spoke to, it turned out they kind of had
their own idea, like they almost wanted
to do it in their own way. They wanted
to escape the commodity trap in their
own way. Um so one of them was
experimenting with like he wanted to
sell his own like raisin snack packs,
and he was putting like spicy stuff on
his raisins or doing some sweet mixes.
Um and like that was kind of his dream
was to was to sell those. And then I
think, you know, branding is another
way, right? That companies are able to
have pricing power, customer loyalty,
and so on. And so it is interesting like
agriculture, part of the reason you have
cartels is cuz it's really hard to have
any pricing power there. But this is one
of those ways that like with Cuties,
they achieved brand recognition and
pricing power. Like there are other
times I get some other clementine, and I
don't like it as much. And then I So the
next time like I look for the Cuties and
I buy the Cuties, and they probably
charge a little bit more, and I'm okay
with that cuz it's a dependable product
that I like. And they did it by
creating, you know, this this cute like
cartoonish character that I think many
of us have seen on the packaging. Um and
so that's yeah, I think And yeah, to
your point, like it's actually not
always the same fruit in the bag because
obviously like fruits go through cycles.
And so, you know, kind of when the
harvest for one ends and they run out,
then they switch to a similar one, but
under the same brand name. That's truly
successful branding when you have a
different product, but it's still
recognized as the same thing.
>> It's just trust us. Don't worry about
it. You're going to be safe. I don't
know, this conversation is like really
making me think generally about how
to some extent rare like true like free
market capitalism is in a lot of
different industries. And whether we're
talking about really big entities like
OPEC came up, or whether we're talking
about raisins or etc. It's really hard
to have sustainable industry without
some level of coordination, especially
if there's like a commodified element to
what's being sold. Yeah, if you want the
end result to be that your society
definitely has something, there needs to
be some degree of like stability,
dependability, regulation, some
something in there to make sure that
it's actually that it's smoothing those
market cycles. Yeah, and I think this is
why
like a field of economics that I'm
really interested in is market design
because I think right like market design
started with some of these
case studies of just really unusual
goods. Like well, a lot of listeners
might know like kidneys is kind of a
canonical example. Like we're not going
to
I think Iran is the one place in the
world where you can buy and sell a
kidney, but you know, most of the world,
the United States, we're not going to
buy and sell kidneys. So like how do you
match people up? How do you make those
quote unquote transactions happen?
Um but I think market design
you know, with the growth of this field,
it's also you know, reached into other
things where there certainly are prices
and I think it's also leading to more
focus on as you say the way that this
kind of like laissez-faire market that's
almost feels like it just sprung from
the earth full form is like
not really a thing. There often rules
being made, sometimes very
intentionally, sometimes you know, kind
of sporadically and random, but you
know, I just think about the fact that
like
Wall Street and finance is a kind of you
know,
probably most people's main image of
like a bastion of pure capitalism. Like
they literally have trading hours and
they like close for the day or they have
kind of like circuit breakers, right?
Where we stop trading for
>> like they're not necessarily that
onerous, but they have
you know, there's various
I forget the
the tests that people have to take, the
certification tests and FINRA and like
certain of these like bodies that
regulate who can get in and so forth.
Like they play a similar like
coordinating role.
>> Also rules like on insider trading
things
>> on insider trading, yeah.
It's also that I was just thinking while
you were talking about Al Roth, like the
the guy the kidney guy.
Um I feel like the way that he sees the
world is like you you actually have
markets everywhere and you are choosing
to see them or not by what you regulate.
So like it is always a coordination
problem and you're just like if you
aren't regulating it and allowing this
market legally, then you're allowing it
in the black market and that's also a
choice and you're accepting whatever
negative externalities come with that.
Like in prohibition it was like well you
have to buy your liquor from a gangster
and maybe get shot. Like is that a good
social structure? Do we like that? And
we didn't like that. So I yeah.
>> And it also led to the over
proliferation of speak easy bars in you
know wealthy cities around the world. Um
but Um you know, you mentioned society
earlier and one topic that I think we've
both done podcasts on um before and it's
a big chapter in your book is child
care. Yes. Which is a sort of great
demonstration in the overall economy of
how the prices of goods keep going down
like TVs are cheaper than ever and
bigger than ever. Um meanwhile child
care just seems to be this like basket
case of a service and the cost keeps
going up. What did you learn from that
chapter? That's one of my favorites for
obvious reasons. I think it's like a
it's such a problem that we have across
our society that like is a problem that
came of good things. Like economic
progress means that like everybody's got
jobs, everybody's wages are going up,
the prices for a lot of these goods as
we have technological advancements and
improvements and efficiencies, the
prices go down and that's fantastic. Our
phones get smarter, no one buys cameras
separately anymore unless we're
literally a photographer.
And then that means that like all these
tech salaries are going up and and you
know labor is getting more and more
expensive. And so kind of meanwhile
across the economy, there are all these
jobs that are not scalable. They're just
like people jobs where you have to do
them with your hands and they're kind of
like bespoke and they're just not you
can't make these same kind of
technological advancements and make the
cost go down. And so there's this like
weird in-elasticity there, but those
people doing those jobs are like I'm
making 20 bucks an hour doing child care
or singing on Broadway and like great,
but I could be over here like thinking
more about chips and you know,
making these technological advancements
and like feed my family and then some.
So what am I doing? And so they migrate
over which makes the labor supply harder
in the child care sector and you just
get this like it's just like kind of a
broken system and so daycares, child
care centers have to operate at like
razor-thin margins just to be able to
get even though it's so expensive. Like
it's crazy.
>> I've never understood this. So like
everyone is paying insane amounts for
child care.
>> Literally insane.
>> And the child care centers don't seem to
actually make that much money off of it.
>> That's correct. So you just like it's
such an empirical question. You just go
and you stack up each thing and it's
like okay, you got to pay for the real
estate, you got to pay for the
insurance, you got to pay for the labor
so that like the people are there.
And then you're just out of money even
though they're waitlists for longer than
the duration of childhood, right? Like
you get on a waitlist and like I think
I'm still on waitlist for my five and a
half year old who's now in like
kindergarten. I'm like I just didn't get
in I guess. I know and like but that's
because they have to keep these
waitlists in order to say like okay, to
keep their spots filled so that they can
kind of operate like they're basically
offering their services at a discount.
Which is wild because it's it's so in
demand and they should be able to raise
prices. But there's also another thing
where like because the family making the
choice to put their kid in daycare, they
have an out. They could just one of them
could drop out of the labor force so
that ends up putting a cap on how much
you can actually charge.
So it's like broken on a few different
in a few different ways and what ends up
happening is like you just need
intervention. Like if you want this to
be a service, you need intervention.
>> That's interesting. I actually had not
thought about that element that if you
hit a certain price then one of the
parent, usually the mother, um will just
drop out of the workforce and do it,
which is not the same case with
healthcare, right? So,
>> you know, it's
it's like yeah,
you get a doctor, right? Like they you
know, you keep raising the price of uh
some, you know, a heart transplant, etc.
It's like, "Okay, you know what?
>> Not going to DIY
>> to get a new heart surgery myself and do
this my own." And like that's never
going to happen, but I have That's an
interesting dynamic in terms of like
what puts a lid on the potential for, I
guess, margin expansion.
>> Yeah, and our brilliant colleague Sara
Gonzales calls this like babies' first
market failure, right? Cuz you have like
everyone's like, "I'm willing to pay so
much money." And yet there are lines
everywhere.
Why are there lines? That's a market
failure. And it is the fact fact that
there is this kind of cap on the price
and therefore, because people have the
alternative, they may not be able to
drop out of the workforce, you know,
one of the, you know, one member of the
couple. And so, you know, that's why
we're in this place like really long
lines, a market failure. One thing that
I think about a lot is, you know, I went
to like an elite university and all
right, you know, I went to um thank you.
And, you know, I've like all in my
career I've been around like a lot of
people well educated, etc. It's like the
number of people who I would call like
peers who like ever went into education,
setting aside just childcare, but like
became a teacher,
I know like one. Like it's really
extraor you know, like one person I'm
friends with who like became like a
public school teacher. And it's just
extraordinary to me the degree to which
this career, which many people think is
like really vital and important to
society, and of course like public
school teachers, an element of their job
is childcare, is that's where people
like how disconnected that is from
people who have had like the privileges
of like myself and all these people I
know just like
never like think about going into that
as a career option. I mean, do you know
many like public school teachers that
like you went to college with or
anything? No, and I absolutely have a
friend who like
works on the tech side of finance and
you're like he would be such a good
teacher. He would probably not do it.
But I think
uh you know this kind of dynamic we've
been talking about uh like it it's
commonly known as cost disease. It's
kind of the name for it. This way that
like
these parts of the economy that look
very similar, they're very labor
intensive, they look very similar to the
way they did 50 years ago, maybe even
100 years ago. They don't have those
kind of crazy productivity gains of
factories, of software. It's a very
simple idea, but it can explain so much.
And I think one kind of implication of
it is that a lot of labor intensive
services are things provided by the
public, by the government. So, you know,
public schools,
uh policing, firefighting. There are
technological improvements there and and
gains to be made for sure, but they're
still they're very labor intensive. And
I think part of the reason why, you
know, teacher salaries are are low
um and budget squeeze there is because
of cost disease. And it's uh you know,
I've absolutely like spoken with people
in firefighting where this is a big
problem that like their labor costs keep
going up and lots of places have not
therefore also increased. You know,
we're not all thinking about cost
disease all the time being like of
course my taxes need to go up X percent
a year to account for cost disease. Um
but like if you don't Yeah, like I
I think we should be talking about it.
Like if you want to make sure that like
people can go into firefighting, go into
teaching, you know, make a solid wage,
afford to live in especially the really
successful cities where there is a lot
of growth
that is great, but also makes cost
disease even worse. Like it is important
to think about. That's a very very
strong argument for public subsidies or
you know, the government providing the
service and you know, increasing taxes
potentially to I like that line of
reasoning.
>> That line at the end of the chapter is
basically just like this it's a good
thing. The sign of your economy doing
well is that your taxes go up forever.
It's like, "Whoa."
That's definitely an optimistic way of
looking at it, for sure.
Well, one like thought experiment
question I had on this was
does AI start to change this equation at
all in the sense that okay, the problem
here is that you have a bunch of child
care workers who see other industries
that are making gains and higher
salaries and they can leave. And then if
we have AI come in to all these sectors
that typically see a lot of productivity
gains like software or other
white-collar jobs, does some of that
leakage start to stop?
>> I love this question. It's like
>> It's like a reverse backlash
optimist.
>> it's like a bunch of people are going to
have to get into home health care
because they lose their white-collar
jobs.
>> it, right? Like most new job creation in
the US has been in the health care
sector.
>> it going to be like? Oh, yeah. But I
think that's not wrong. Like cuz all the
AI disruption, yeah, collapses a sector
of the economy of the labor market and
then those people need jobs and so they
go into the things that are bespoke
human hand jobs like child care and
home. I love it. I love it.
>> This has been my joke idea for a website
I want to write code, which is
and I'll just say it cuz it's not
actually
>> Just say it. I feel like you've already
said it. Was it on a podcast or just to
me?
>> basically a website and you like enter
and it's like, "What is your career?
What is your education level? And
yeah, and how many years have you
worked?" And then it's like, "Okay, what
will your job be post AGI?" You click it
and everyone just gets returned the same
answer, home health care aid. Like
that's sort of it. It's just like this
is a joke. Yeah. It doesn't matter what
it is. Yeah. That is the
>> to make one joke.
>> Yeah. One and I'm going to go home. Do
it well. Maybe I'll make it. Maybe I'll
make it. Maybe I'll make But I also I
think I kind of have a pitch here, so
whoever will be like the overlords in
our AI future, like please consider my
pitch.
>> Okay. But like, you know
ChatGPT, if you're listening to this
Like I think it was kind of required in
like, I don't know, the the odds, the
early 2010s, that whenever someone wrote
about a four-day work week or basic
universal income,
you would talk about how John Maynard
Keynes made this prediction about, you
know, I I don't remember exactly how far
out, but you know, in X number of
decades, you know, we'll be living we'll
be so much richer, this will kind of be
our living standard.
>> abundance
>> And therefore, we'll be working way
fewer hours.
>> Yeah. And famously, he underestimated
how much wealthier Britain would get, as
well as other countries like the United
States. But of course, he greatly
overestimated the idea that he thought
we'd be working like 20 hours a week, 10
hours a week, but of course, like
working hours have stayed quite high.
And I think a point I've seen, and I'm
sorry, I forget who made this point
first, but I thought it was really
smart, was like, well, it's not Yeah,
we're not all working 10 hours a week,
but now like children in the vast
majority of the world don't work, and
retirees retire. So like we made choices
so that, you know, some people could
work less and could get an education or
have a secure retirement. And I do think
like if we are going to I don't know if
it's coming, but if we are contemplating
the potential of a world that has so
much, Yeah.
>> intelligence on demand, so much
automation, and so much abundance that
we like, in theory, don't know what to
do with ourselves, like
perhaps allowing parents to not be like,
"Man, I can barely afford child care, do
I drop out?" And it feels like a
terrible choice, and instead being in a
place where it's like, it's a social
norm that like we are wealthy enough
that people can drop out to take care of
your children during formative years.
Like, that's a vision I would love to
see people express with excitement more.
Can I push back just a little bit, which
is As a person who's been pushed That's
so nice, but I care too. No, no, I mean,
I agree. Let me work.
>> But like, in defense of Keynes, cuz I've
thought about this a lot, which was
like, you know, think about like what
quote work meant when he wrote the book,
or sorry, when he was writing that. And
now think about it like there are those
of us who have like jobs literally like
writing books and talking and stuff like
that.
>> He's like, "That's fun, bro."
>> I'm just I'm just saying like
does it really compared to like what
like what Keynes had in mind when he
talked about work and labor and toil
versus what so many people do in the
knowledge Does that even like count as
work in some way? In other words, like a
lot of people really like their jobs
these days in a way that I suspect was
not the case when Keynes was writing.
And so it's like
are you even Are people who like their
jobs even quote working 15 hours a week
half the time?
>> have to go into a coal mine. I never
have to lose a finger on a sewing This
is what he was talking about when he was
talking about work. Yeah. And now there
are a lot of people that literally never
have to do any hours, let alone 15, but
any hours of work. Now, I understand
that's not everyone
>> are the jobs that are most likely to be
disrupted by AI.
>> yeah, I'm just saying that I think I
changed my mind.
Like been more right than Keynes gets
credit for. I think these are two good
defenses of Keynes, but the point that
like there's a lot of, you know, there's
a lot more leisure time which is now
people actually retire and they're not
like toiling in fields cuz they're
insecure and the fact that a lot of
people, yes, are getting like
self-actualization from their job and
that feels like a a story of progress as
well. Well, actually on this note, I
mean, there's a lot in the book that is
framed like very optimistically um and
you make a lot about
you know, human advancement and the idea
there's the famous chart in there of
like how much you would have to uh work
in order to afford like a certain amount
of light over time. Like there's a lot
of human progress in this book, but if
you look around in 2026, certainly in
America, it doesn't feel like that's
necessarily translating into the general
vibes. There's a sort of like nihilistic
sense
of wealth building and economic
advancement and people just sort of
giving up and thinking that the system's
rigged against them and that they're
never going to be able to afford a house
or whatever.
In your view, as the authors of a whole
book on, you know, a guide to economic
life, is that a failure of like
storytelling about how the economy
works, or is that sense, that vibe shift
an actual reflection of like secular
stagnation in the way the economy works?
Well, my bias would be the latter, but I
didn't write the book, so I want to I do
want to let you answer first.
>> my inclination is like, yes, like both.
You know, I think there's both
I think the fact that um I I think we've
seen surveys that people often think
that the average American is working
more than ever, when in fact, you know,
we have seen not huge, but modest
decreases in in the amount of time that
the average American works. Um there's
often a lot of sense that American, the
average American or meeting American has
become much worse off. That does not
match up with statistics. So, I think
there is absolutely some
um like whether it's built in or not,
there's there's pessimism there that's
perhaps, you know, maybe it's something
about human nature, maybe it's something
about storytelling and maybe this book
can help
um you know, be a positive force in that
respect. But I also think like, you
know, this book is absolutely
um you know, has chapters talking about
big challenges and places where, you
know, we have housing shortages and
that's often from people making selfish
choices, ones that are rational and
understandable, but that that lead to,
you know, this problem of housing
shortages, high rents, people not being
able to afford a home ownership. There
are other examples. I think also a way I
think about it is, right, like we have
the hockey stick chart growth of like
the global economy over the last 200
years and it's incredible, but at the
same time, like, you know, I I feel that
way. I feel anxiety, anxiousness. I
don't feel fully secure and optimistic
about everything.
Um You're not happy that you can like
flip on a light switch and get hours and
hours of life.
>> about it, but but I also think it's, you
know, it's maybe that way where it's
like
you can be somewhat comforted by the
incredible story of progress we are part
of.
But probably if we all took that for
granted, you know, would the progress
continue? Um and it feels kind of
similar. I don't know if you've had
experiences, right? Like you're working
on a project and you're nervous about it
and you're tense. And okay, well, I'll
just put this in first person cuz this
is true for me. You can tell me this is
true for you, but like you're working on
a project, you're tense, you're nervous,
you're stressed about it. And as many
times as I tell myself you've done
similar projects like this before, you
figured it out, it went really well, it
probably will this time, too.
I'm absolutely going to be anxious and
stressed for quite a bit of that time.
You know, some good moments, too, but I
will be I will have those, you know,
that anxiety and whatnot. And like
maybe I could get to a place where I'm
just blissful the entire project, but
probably some amount of that stress and
anxiety is required. And if it wasn't
there, I wouldn't actually get to the
good outcome. I feel in my head is like
oh, I'm so blessed. I can turn on a
light switch and I get light and I can
afford raisins and all this stuff. And
like
and you hear people say like oh, well,
you know, you can like get penicillin
and like you know, the king of England
200 years ago would have died from this
infection, whatever.
I understand that in my head. It does
nothing for me on my body.
Like it's like I get that and I I
appreciate it. Great. I love living
but like it does not do any It does not
actually like on any like real emotional
level make me happy. Just sort of like I
like intellectually. We have a Planet
Money episode for this. This is the cost
of free donuts. Once you start getting
something for free, you will not pay for
it. So I'm it's not the exact but like
you have these things already. You do
not delight in their arrival every time.
Although I do delight in the arrival of
amoxicillin. Like I feel like
actually and It's just this whole thing
is like oh, be so appreciative because
think about how like they were the king
would have been so jealous of you. I was
like great, but that's still like I'm
exhausted at the end of the day and all
this stuff. Like it only goes so far.
And I think there is a disconnect
between like, you know, we've had life
expectancy like peak in this country and
things are there is there does seem to
be some kind of sea change in in how our
trajectory is going. I think we Yes, we
can accept that we're way better off
than we were 100 years ago. We're not
all dying in the mines, children aren't
working. Like this is all great. But I
think that that there in the past 5 10
years there is this sort of
I don't know, there's a hollowing, there
the inequality stuff that like the rise
of AI and the like future that we all
know is going to be very different. They
were in the middle of this enormous
transition.
I don't think I mean I think we all can
accept like the the disconnect between
consumer sentiment and this the data
suggests that the data need updating.
Suggests that like we're not quite
collecting in the way that we need to
be. There's something missing. And I
mean not to get Derek Thompson, but I do
think a lot of it is societal glue and
we lost the habit. But it like what else
and how do you measure those things? I
think also, you know, we talked before
about how often people's survey
responses suggest that they think, you
know, wages have gone way down when in
fact it's gone up. But also like
that almost maybe captures a more
fundamental truth. They're like people
are right that like the average worker
is not benefiting as much from economic
growth in the US as it as they used to.
And so,
you know, if if the sentiment that like
things have just gotten worse and worse
and worse is not quite true, it's
absolutely true that like gains are no
longer as broadly shared and there's
there's a lot to like think about.
>> I think this is key. Like I think humans
have a innate tendency to look at
relative gains versus absolute gains.
>> Definitely. Definitely.
>> Yeah. Um and so you see that like come
to the fore right now.
All right, I think that's a great place
to leave it. What? I thought we were
just getting into it.
Um Thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots.
>> Thank you for having me. Thank you so
much for having me.
>> book.
The book again is Planet Money, a guide
to the economic forces that shape your
life.
Joe, that was really fun.
>> Yeah, I love catching up with them. That
was great. And it is genuinely like I
haven't read the full book cover to
cover, but I happened flipping through
it and like just the number of
interesting things that you can pick out
like the oranges thing, fascinating.
>> No, I think
>> also, sorry, I I forgot to ask Alex
this, but like one of the few people I
found that actually shares my like
obsession with insurance as a potent
force in not just the economy, but in
society. I had a I have to say I have an
insurance thought that I'll share with
you afterwards for maybe a future
episode. Um, but I think like I find
these kind of conversations really
interesting and helpful because like
it's like sort of like pretty core
ideas. Like, okay, like what is the
issue with child care? Or what is you
know, what do agricultural cooperatives
cartels, like what problems they
actually solve? How much are we actually
working and why have we gotten so much
richer, but you know, people are still
like working
>> bad about it. Yeah, etc. Like these are
like pretty big
>> Yeah. questions. And it's pretty obvious
like they sort of like if you like think
about them, you can get to like some
interesting places. And so it's good to
sort of just like zoom back and like
think about some of these things for a
while. Also, to your point, it kind of
illustrates once again like all the
decisions that go into the economy in
the sense that like
the economy is often pitched at least in
America as this free market thing that
just kind of exists and like is
automatic in many ways and just does its
own thing, but actually there are all
these active decisions and
>> policies that go into it.
>> Choices about market structure. You know
what I was thinking about was one of the
things that we've talked about for uh
a lot on the podcast is that after the
great financial crisis,
you know, the home the housing industry
got hollowed out, all these home
builders went out of business, etc. And
now we're like faced with a big housing
shortage, etc.
What if there had been more coordination
among home builders to curb both the
upside and the downside etc. Would that
be more sustainable? Now, like people
look will get really anxious about the
idea of like any sort of like you know,
homebuilder coordination etc.
>> or whatever?
>> But when you look at the cost that we
pay for boom bust cycles, you understand
why some of these mechanisms get
developed and blessed at least for
certain periods of time by the law etc.
because you there is a price that you
pay for boom busts over time. And so I
think like these are actually like
pretty interesting questions.
>> It is phenomenal that like we haven't
done much for housing in that sense, but
we have for raisins, right? There's a
cartel or a cooperative that exists in
order to smooth the boom bust cycle in
raisins. It's funny like the things that
we pick as socially important. All
right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart. Check
out the book Planet Money, a guide to
the economic forces that shape your life
by Alex Maimasi. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dash
Bennett at Dashbot, and Kel Brooks at
Kel Brooks.
And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at bloomberg.com/odd
lots. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our discord
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe. Thanks
for watching.